[music]
[music] Pushkin.
On the morning of November 24th, 2014,
just a few days before Thanksgiving,
Michael Linton drove from his house in
West Los Angeles to Culver City, the
home of the sprawling complex that
houses Sony Pictures Entertainment. He
was the CEO. He had been at Sony nearly
11 years.
>> The films were all going well. The we
had a bunch of stuff going really well
on television. Breaking Bad
[clears throat] and Blacklist and things
like that. The the music company also
was having a very good year. So
everything seemed to be on a steady
pace.
>> He turned on to Bundy from Samenti
Boulevard.
I was driving to work and I [music] get
a phone call from our CFO, Dave Hendler,
and he said, "Mike, all of our systems
are down. Nothing [music] is working
here at the studio. It appears like a
bunch of our laptops have been fried um
and are unusable. They're actually
broken, and we we [music] do not for the
life of us understand what's happened."
You arrived a few minutes later. The
studio is a lot like a college campus.
It's like 5 or 7,000 people.
>> [music]
>> um half of them are employees, but as a
result of you all sitting in that one
space, word travels very fast. And when
I by the time I drove up, there were
there were crowds already in front of
the building like, "What's going on?
What's happening? What's happening?"
The entire Sony Pictures operation had
been hacked [music] and whoever had done
it had clearly gotten deep inside.
>> Nobody knew for sure what was going on.
It was just pandemonium, frankly.
A few days later came the [music] first
blow. The hackers released the company's
emails, all of them, onto [music] a
website called Paste Bin. The password
dies
[music]
123. D Sony Pictures Entertainment.
The press had a field day. Those emails
were salacious because they involved
movie stars and [music] people saying
things about people they that they
shouldn't have been saying. And you
know, you're [music] seeing the internal
10 years of internal correspondence at a
big Hollywood studio, which by
definition has a lot of juicy stuff in
it.
>> Not just things involving stars, [music]
everyone's emails. Emails to your wife
or husband, to your kids, emails about
people's medical problems,
relationships, and not because, as in
the case of the Jeffrey Epstein files,
the people involved had been associating
with a known predator. These were just
people who happened to work for a movie
studio.
>> And in addition to that, over time, you
know, and we had all this stuff up on
our system, you know, the Karate Kid,
which was about to be coming out. Um the
the new script for James Bond, which
nobody had seen up until that point, was
being released. So there was, you know,
it was it was a lot of juicy material
that was being released into the public.
[music]
It was one of the most damaging business
hacks in US [music] history. Some
estimates put the cost to Sony at over
$und00 million. [music] And when Linton
looked back on what happened, he came to
an uncomfortable conclusion. That in
[music] some significant sense, it was
all his fault.
[music]
My name is Malcolm Gladwell. You're
listening to Revisionist History, my
podcast about [music] things overlooked
and misunderstood. This is the first
episode in a miniseries about mistakes,
inspired by a book that Linton and Josh
Steiner have published called From
Mistakes to Meaning, in which they
investigate the origin and consequences
of mistakes, starting with the story of
what happened on the Sony lot that
November morning.
We're going to start there as well
because I remember it all firsthand.
Michael Linton is one of my closest
friends. In those days, I would stay
[music] at his guest house in Los
Angeles for weeks at a time. Like Kato
Kalin,
I I remember, if I remember correctly,
you guys came
to New York for Thanksgiving
>> to house.
>> Yeah, we did.
>> In the middle of all of this,
>> we did. Yeah. because we wanted to sort
of have the kids feel like everything
was normal.
>> And I was at that I was with I came to
Thanksgiving.
>> Oh yeah. Oh yeah. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah.
>> And I I just remember I have a it's
burned in my memory is you sitting in a
chair in the corner of the room by
yourself with your like head in your
hands.
>> Oh yeah. It was a low moment. It was
those weeks were terrible. I remember I
lost all that weight.
>> Yeah.
>> So it was a rough time.
>> Yeah. That was 12 years ago. the worst
moment of his career by far. And in the
ensuing years, Michael never talked
about any of it. None of it. Not with me
and not with anyone, as far as I can
tell. It was a memory that he decided to
bury until all of a sudden he dug it
back up. This is his story.
As the CEO of an entertainment [music]
company, Michael Littton was in an odd
position. The CEO of say a software
company is almost always a software
engineer. The leaders of a company like
that belong culturally to the same world
as a rank and file. That's true of many
professions. Principles are former
teachers. The person running sales at
Ford used to sell Fords. But in the
creative industry, the people running
the business tend to belong to a
different culture than the people who
work for them. I would sometimes visit
Michael at Sony and as a carnut, I would
get a kick out of [music] walking
through the executive parking lot and
seeing the long row of shiny BMWs and
Porsches and Mercedes and Audi's until I
came to the CEO spot and there was
Michael's white Volkswagen [music]
Golf. I'm the non-creative person. I'm
the person who's supposed to mind the
store, so to speak. I'm the person who's
meant to turn the lights out before we
all go home. I'm the person who's make
making sure that everything is sort of
running properly that we're making the
numbers that and I was with the
exception of maybe one other person
around there the only guy in a suit
>> and you're the only one going to Japan.
>> I'm pretty much the only one going to
Japan.
>> Sony Pictures was and remains a
subsidiary of the Sony Corporation which
is a massive electronics insurance and
media conglomerate based in Tokyo.
>> I remember there was always the same
flight. It was an ANA flight that left
at 1:00 in the morning out of LAX.
>> And the reason I took that flight is it
got in at 5:00 in the morning into
Haneda, which is the the Metropol and I
would take that same flight back
at midnight the next day.
>> God exhausting
>> because I had little kids and the other
thing and I wanted to get home. The
creatives at Sony found new ideas,
developed scripts, and forged
relationships with actors and directors.
But for a movie to be made, it had to be
approved by a special greenlight meeting
chaired by Michael. All of the
department heads would be there.
Television, home entertainment,
marketing, legal, finance, government
affairs. They would zero in on the
likely audience, look at estimates of
how much a movie would cost, how much
movies in that particular genre or
category typically made, figure out how
lucrative the overseas market might be,
on and on. People get caught up in their
passions and get caught up in their
emotional interests. And my job often
times was to make sure that we were
dispassionate about things and objective
in the way we looked at
>> this disciplining function that you
serve is is working. You
>> Yeah. There were no water worlds by way
of example, you know, heaven's gate. No,
we had, you know, we had our group of
failures, but they weren't things that
would sink the the studio or even sink
the year, frankly.
>> Yeah. Yeah. So it was pretty Yeah, it
was pretty steady in its performance at
that point.
>> And then came the summer of 2013.
So lead us up to So a movie comes up for
consideration,
>> right? Called The Interview.
>> Called The Interview. And it's presented
by Seth Rogan, and we had had a lot of
success with Seth Rogan up until that
moment. He had produced a series of
R-rated comedies for the studio that had
done really, really well. and he comes
in with his movie The Interview. And the
interview is about two hapless
journalists played by Seth Rogan and
James Franco who go off to North Korea
ostensibly you know to to convince Kim
Jong-un to be in some television
reportage but in truth they were under
the opaces of the CIA in the plot of the
movie and they were going to assassinate
Kim Jong-un at the end of the movie and
they say this is the next thing we would
like to do and [music]
uh we'd like a quick response or the
agent said this because you know if you
don't want to do that there's somebody
else.
>> Everyone, Sony and Rogan decide to do a
read through on the Sony lot for Michael
and his counterpart on the creative side
of the studio, Amy Pascal.
>> We had promised them that after that
read through, we would give them um a
yay or a nay decision.
>> And that's sort of the setup for how
this whole thing came to pass.
>> Yeah. So, they all show up.
>> So, they all show up. And by the way,
when I say we would give them a yay or
nay decision, in the normal course of
things, what we would have done is you
would have had the read through and you
would have um uh had that meeting, but
you would have had the meeting knowing
that the thing was funny and it worked
with an audience. Yeah.
>> Or not, but in this case, it did.
>> Yeah. So, describe describe the read.
>> So,
just to give a real sense of it, the
studio is the old MGM studio. It's 44
acres of art deco buildings and
beautiful soundstages that go back to
the 20s and the 30s. It's the it's the
lot where they made uh the Wizard of Oz.
And across the street from that is
there's this very modern, not very nicel
lookinging building. And in the bottom
of the building, there was a there was a
very large room and that's where we had
the read through. When I walk in the
room, it's what you would imagine it to
be. The actors are all standing there
very casually ready to go. Um, the
creative folks are also, you know,
they're almost indistinguishable in
their dress to be honest from the from
the actors. And then there's me in a
dark suit and white [laughter] shirt,
pair of laced up leather shoes. And, you
know, I stand out like a sore thumb. And
the, you know, and then we start the
read through and it's it's really funny.
It's it's like you can't stop laughing
funny. Everybody is laughing. And at the
very end, um, you know, Seth Rogan
stands up and James Franco stands
[music] up and Amy says, "Let's make
this." And everybody's super
enthusiastic about doing it. And I got
just got completely caught up in the
moment. And I said, "Yeah, let's go do
this." [music] Which is not something I
ever would have done. And I'd been in
that job at that point for over a
decade. And I had never done that up
until that moment.
>> That was his mistake. [music]
It is understandable, I think, why
Michael didn't want to talk about his
mistake for so long. None of us want to
talk about our mistakes. Not just
because we're afraid of looking bad or
because the memory of our mistake is too
painful to revisit, but because we feel
obliged to come up with a reason for our
mistake. And that part is really hard.
For their book, From Mistakes to
Meaning, Michael and his friend Josh
Steiner interviewed a dozen or so people
about a mistake they'd made. With each
story taking up a chapter, and I was one
of the people they talked to, I told
them about a mistake that I think
changed the course of my life. And yet,
when the time came to try and explain
why I did what I did, I couldn't do it.
I drew a blank. And I found that sudden
inability to account for my long ago
error so bewildering that I became
overwhelmed and told them I wanted to
switch to another far less consequential
mistake. My sense is that this is what
Michael was avoiding until he realized
that by leaving something as traumatic
as the hack unexamined, he was only
making things worse. What happened was
five years ago, which was five years
after the hack, um Josh Steiner and I,
Josh is my partner in this and actually
the the idea for the book is his. Um we
were walking on the beach one day and
we'd been good friends and he had was he
had been around during the hack. He and
I had spoken a lot in that period and
been very helpful to me. Um, he said,
'You know, Michael, you you never ever
want to talk about this thing, and I
know it it weighs heavy on you, and it's
frustrating to me that you won't talk
about it, and I and I don't think it's
healthy that you're not talking about
it. And I think we probably I think what
might be a good idea is if we both
investigated this stuff and we looked
into it. So, up until that time, uh,
that moment, actually, Josh was 100%
correct. I did everything in my power to
put it in a drawer and not look at it,
think about it. So I really didn't
investigate why I had come to that
decision in that moment until we sort of
went through the process of writing the
book
>> or investigating the book.
>> What they saw in the subjects they
interviewed was what a good shrink would
see in the course of analysis that
people very early in life develop ways
of organizing the world, of seeing
themselves in relation to others,
schemas as they call them. And those
schemas persist as a kind of silent
filter for your experiences.
>> What it really does is it gives you a
shortorthhand for how to understand a
situation in the moment. It's just like,
oh, okay, I I recognize this this thing
is like this thing, and so I can make
this decision, which for the most part
serves us well. But sometimes when
you're not understanding the context
you're in, those schemas can lead you to
a bad decision. Michael and Josh got a
psychologist from John's Hopkins,
Allison Papadakus, to assist them. And
all of them went back over the mistakes
stories they collected and then over
their own stories until they began to
see a pattern. How long did it take you
to come to what you believe to be the
best understanding of why you why you
decided to greenlight that movie in that
way? Both [music] Josh and Allison said
because I didn't conclude as to why I
had come to that decision. They started
unpacking and going back and I would say
within the first couple of months, two
or three months, maybe a little longer,
we got down to the base level of why I
had agreed to [music] do that in that
moment and made that mistake, which was
um so going back to when I was eight or
nine years old, my parents, we were
living in America at the time. My
parents uh moved my sister and myself to
Holland out of the blue [music] pretty
much really out of the blue cuz it was
in sort of the August September period
just as school was starting and they
came into the into into the house one
day and said we're moving to Holland.
There was business reasons to do it and
the rest of our family was already over
there. So I found myself in September
stuck in a in a school where I didn't
speak the language, didn't know anybody.
And over the course of the next year or
[music] two, I was I led a very very not
a very but a lonely existence relative
to the one that I was experiencing in
America where I was, you know, had a
group of friends, spoke the language, it
easy [music] time. And I developed this
desire always to be part of the gang and
particularly part of the cool gang
because that was the gang that I even
once I had made friends they weren't
that they were they still remain friends
of mine but these were a bunch of kids
who like myself were pretty nerdy. Um
and that schema that thing traveled with
me for most of my life. in fact all of
my life and it's always been this sort
of a little bit nose pressed against the
window
um and wanting to be part of it and what
we concluded was in that moment where I
said okay let's go and make the movie I
had been in the job for a long time I
had been the guy who was always saying
no I was the actual suit in the room as
I described earlier and I just said you
know what screw it in this [music]
moment I want to be part of that group I
don't want to be Mr. No, I don't want to
be the suit. [music]
I'd like to be part of it. And I said,
"Yes."
What should he have done? He should have
said, "We'll get back to you."
So re let's replay it
and only this time you don't say
yes in the room and doing a table read
and you say
everyone's really excited. Everyone's
laughing really hard and you say, "This
sounds great. We're going to take it to
our normal meeting."
>> Right?
>> Okay. So, go. You have the normal
meeting. What happens in the normal
meeting?
>> Well, you would have sat around the
table. Everybody would have looked at
the numbers and looked at what prior
movies had done like it and they would
have on paper you would say financially
this is a goer. Let's do this. But
presumably what would have happened
would have been that the folks from
public policy or our general counsel
would have said, "You know what? You're
now trolling in waters that are not
typical to a movie studio because there
is this thing going on with North Korea
and Japan and let's take a moment. Let's
check back with Tokyo whether this is
really a good idea." They for sure would
have told us not to do it.
>> Mhm.
>> Um and that would have stopped the
movie.
>> Why would Tokyo have said no? because of
something that Michael didn't find out
until much later
>> in this country at that time, North
Korea was sort of a you know not well
yeah a joke like we laughed a little bit
when we saw those images
>> that was not the case with respect to
Japan. So to for you to understand that
relationship going back to the 70s
they'd had a even before that but in the
70s in particular the relationship
between North Korea and Japan was
extremely contentious to the point where
a hundred school children were kidnapped
off the streets and and carted off to
North Korea in that period and in just
as we were
>> a hundred kids. Yeah. and nobody really
understood what had happened to those
kids. And there was ongoing uh friction
between the two countries on a variety
of different levels. But one of the
things Prime Minister Abbe was trying to
do in the moment that we were making
these decisions which I had no knowledge
of as was he was negotiating with the
North Korean government to get those the
the whatever was remaining of those
people back to Japan and trying to
reestablish or find some normalized
relationship back with North Korea.
>> So we were right in that moment.
>> Yeah. Yeah. Yeah,
>> which is relevant cuz now we're thinking
about making this movie where you're,
you know, killing the leader of North
Korea, which and you're owned by a
Japanese company. So that
>> that equation is not a good one.
>> It wasn't like The Interview was going
to be one of Sony's blockbuster
franchises. It was a small budget movie,
a genre movie. This genre didn't have
the possibility of a massive upside.
This movie was never going to make $2
million.
>> No. And and the other thing you got to
remember about our rated comedies is you
only you only release them here in
America. There is no international in
them.
>> Yeah.
>> So, uh there it's constricted both
geographically and also by its audience
cuz it's R-rated. So, you can't get, you
know, kids under 17 in there in the
first place. So, no family. It's mostly
guys. It's it's it's limited, but you
know who the audience is.
Universal, Sony's counterpart across
town, would almost certainly have made
it had Sony passed. Rogan would have
been fine. Sony would have been fine.
So, but your um would it would it have
cost you reputationally within the
studio to say no to this? Do you think
it would have reinforced the Michael's
the suit, he doesn't get it?
>> No.
>> No. [music]
>> No, I don't think so.
>> Would have been legitimate. I think, you
know, had I pointed that out at the
time, people would have said, "Oh, that
makes total sense, of course." And they
would have moved on.
The interview was scheduled to be
released in theaters in the Christmas
season of 2014. And a few months before
the release date, Sony put out a trailer
which made it abundantly clear to the
North Koreans how transgressive this
movie was going to be.
>> Mr. Raport, I'm Agent Lacy with Central
Intelligence.
You two are going to be in a room alone
with Kim and the CIA would love it if
you could take him out.
H
>> take him out
>> for coffee, dinner, for kimchi?
>> No. Uh, take him out.
>> You want us to kill the leader of North
Korea?
And that was really the first moment
when the public knew what the movie was
going to be about.
>> Um, and shortly thereafter we received
and I a cryptic message
and we had to do some detective work to
figure out where it was coming from. It
terminate came out came from the North
Korean envoy in New York City and it was
on an obscure website. It was brought to
our attention that there was a warning
from the North Korean government that
there would be consequences if we put
out the picture.
>> Michael approached North Korea experts
at the Rand Corporation and the State
Department for advice.
>> Um because I figured they would probably
know and asked them both, is this
something I should be taking seriously?
And in both cases they said um and I
think this was all based they they had
such a scant knowledge of the current
leader of North Korea. Keep in mind he
was only there for a couple of years and
so it's all based on what they knew of
his dad and they said you know what it's
all bark no bite. Yes there'll be some
noise but you don't have to worry about
that. They have no capabilities of
hurting you. Now they didn't mention I
in my head it was always about physical
retribution in as it turns out they had
substantial cyber capabilities.
>> Yeah. In fact one legendary hacker you
were hacked by one of the greatest
hackers in the history of hacking.
>> As it turns out I was.
>> His name is Park Jin Hulk head of the
so-called Lazarus group. The team behind
the Wuk cry hack of 2017. Not to mention
the legendary Bangladesh bank heist
where the Lazarus group tried to siphon
off the entire currency reserves of the
country of Bangladesh [music]
and almost got away with it. Yeah. So
anyway, we get those threats. Um we
determined that they're not important.
Um that being said, the threats
increased and the folks back in
>> you say the threats increase
>> meaning there were more of them. There
were more like don't do this. If you do
this, there will be consequences. And it
did get to the place where I I and I was
at that point talking regularly with my
boss back in Tokyo who was great and
very supportive. And at some point there
was a question as to whether we should
figure out how to change the ending
because that was the part
>> presumably although they didn't say it
that was most offensive. And we did we
went through a whole exercise where we
tried to reduce you know the violence of
those scenes and we did all these other
kind of stuff. But truthfully, that was
really a silly exercise because it at
the end of the day, you were killing Kim
Jong-un, you know, so that that and
>> there's no universe in which you go back
to Seth Rogan and say, "Kill the
assassination
>> or can you can't you make it about a
fictional
country? Can you do something other than
assassinate him?" You don't have to.
We're not talking about the movie
doesn't hinge on them assassinating the
North Korean. So, I have a very I I I
have a very strong memory of this. It in
in Seth and his partners, and I'm not
sure he's wrong about this, in their
estimation,
>> the humor of this was all about the fact
that it was actually that it was Kim
Jong-un or an actor playing Kim Kim
Jong-un who you were going to kill. And
it had to be about North Korea and it
actually had to be about
the dictator running North Korea. that
sort of doing a version of it, the
Charlie Chaplan version of it, you know,
where he he doesn't name Hitler by name,
but you know it's Hitler.
>> At the beginning of the Second World
War, Charlie Chaplan made a devastating
satire called The Great Dictator. He
never said who it was about. He didn't
have to.
>> That was not the version of it that Seth
and those guys were watching.
>> Even though the Charlie Chaplan version
is a movie classic that is revered even
today.
>> Yes. Yes. I'm not sure. The interview
hasn't reached that status yet. It
might. It might. It's
>> the great dictator.
>> It's got a few years to go. The great
dictator has had many years between now
and then.
>> Hello. Who?
>> This is the secretary of communication
for North Korea. Our supreme leader, Kim
Jong-un, is interested in doing an
interview with Dave Skylark.
>> Oh my god.
>> We will meet 50 km west of Dang Dong,
northeastern China.
>> Did you just say China? And did you just
say Dong?
>> Then the hack happened. One of the
biggest studios in Hollywood was
paralyzed. The press went to town on the
Sony emails. President Obama weighed in.
The major theater chains refused to show
the movie. And Michael decided that as a
matter of principle, he had to find
another way to release the movie. He
wasn't going to give in to an act of
intimidation. And ultimately, he figured
it out. Eric Schmidt, then the chairman
of Google, offered to release the movie
online. Remember, this is 2014, long
before streaming was an easy option. And
Patrick Collison of Stripe had his team
work overtime to figure out how to do
online ticketing.
Hollywood didn't help him. Silicon
Valley did. [music]
The phone was dead. I never heard from
any of our competitors. The only person
who stood up for us that I recollect was
George Clooney. He was the only one with
the courage [music] and the loyalty to
actually step forward and say what these
people are doing is the right thing
trying to get this movie out and the
community should be supporting them. But
nobody else did. And by the way, neither
did the mayor of LA. Never picked up the
phone and called. Neither did the
attorney general of of California
despite the fact that this was, you
know, the biggest cyber crime that had
ever happened in the state.
>> Yeah. What did Seth Rogan say through
all all of this? Seth was upset about
the fact that we were not getting it
into movie theaters. And he was uh he he
was already upset over the summertime.
And I get it. He's a filmmaker at our
efforts to sort of edit the movie around
the around the actual assassination. But
then that spilled into his upset about,
you know, you're not getting into movie
theaters. And we tried to explain to him
that the movie theaters wouldn't take
it. We wound up actually getting
independent movie theaters to take it as
opposed to the big chains like AMC. Um,
but I don't think and I' I've you know
I've never talked to Seth Rogan about it
after the fact. I he wasn't particularly
grateful for what everybody had done. He
saw this as what the studio should be
doing because he had made a good movie
and he wanted to see it in movie
theaters. Did he apologize though for
just out even a kind of pro-formal
apology that like I did initiate a
process that brought a lot of pain to a
lot of people?
>> No. No, he didn't. No, he didn't.
>> Let me read to you in fact from Rogan's
memoir published a few years ago. This
is right before he describes going to a
crucial meeting at Sony as the hack was
unfolding. He says he had to take a taxi
to the lot because he was still high
from partying the night before. Here is
how he describes Michael. He was a dude
in his mid-50s, relatively fit, red
skin, large horns, a tail, hooves, and a
legion of screaming demons flanking him
at all times.
Michael stayed on at Sony for three more
years. Then he left. He's not in the
movie business anymore. And along the
way, I think he learned a hard lesson.
Michael would never say this, or maybe
even think this, but let me say this as
his friend who saw him that day at
Thanksgiving with his head in his hands.
Those who make mistakes, mistakes that
they are willing to understand [music]
and own up to, deserve better from the
rest of us.
>> [music]
>> Revisionist History is produced by Nina
Bird Lawrence, Lucy Sullivan, and Ben
Nadaf Hafrey. Our editor is Karen
Shakuri. Factchecking by Anelie Mcato.
Our executive producer is Jacob Smith.
Engineering by Nina Bird Lawrence, Owen
[music] Miller, and Sarah Bugger.
Original music by Luis Gara. Sound
design and mastering by Jake Gorski. I'm
Malcolm Gladwell.
Tune in [music] next week for the second
episode in our mistakes series.
>> We knew the truth. We knew [music]
that he had been an airman. We knew that
he had been convicted of a violent crime
and we knew that we should have reported
that to the FBI and we didn't.
>> The question is not whether you're going
to fail. The question is how do you
handle it when you do fail? Do you take
ownership? Do you step up?